Aside from player rest, there are many other factors that can influence game outcomes along with the variety of other factors measured during in NBA games. Many of these differences occur at a team level, which makes sense because each franchise in the NBA operates as a separate entity with their own general managers, coaching staff, owners, etc. Each owner has his own standards, every general manager has his own style, and each coach has his philosophy. The composition of the actual roster, a mixture of veterans and youth, may also affect tendencies. 

The first indicator examined on the team-level is the effect of experience and age. The five oldest teams in the NBA during the 2016-2017 season were the Cleveland Cavaliers, Los Angeles Clippers, San Antonio Spurs, Dallas Mavericks, and Atlanta Hawks. Age in the NBA doesn’t necessarily correlate with specific physical or statistical factors; however, it can be hypothesized that game tendencies are affected by age due to experience as well as physical fatigue. The five youngest teams in that same time span were the Philadelphia 76ers, Portland Trailblazers, Toronto Raptors, Phoenix Suns, and Denver Nuggets. Right off the bat, it is not obvious that age and experience might be a clear indicator of team performance. Both the oldest and youngest teams have a mixture of successful and poor performing teams. However, if we dig deeper, we can discover some interesting things.

Analyzing the older teams first shows clear trends that appear across the board among all five teams. The mid-range shot, as the casual basketball fan may expect, is a dying art. Both three pointers and inside shots outnumber midrange shots among all teams. To examine another factor in determining efficiency, the data is faceted by quarter of play to investigate the fatigue factor of age. Cleveland’s shot graphs indicate that over time, the team starts to take more three pointers and less inside shots, which could be due to fatigue due to age. The Clippers and Mavericks exhibit this same behavior, with the Mavericks even shooting more threes in every quarter. Atlanta and San Antonio shoot a relatively smaller number of three point shots compared to the other three teams, but the real comparison will be seeing how these numbers relate to the younger teams. 

The least extreme of the young teams seems to be the Philadelphia 76ers. By this, we mean to say that the Sixers exhibit a chart that is similar to the Hawks and Spurs, although still showing the tendency to shoot more shots inside the paint. The other four teams clearly exhibit a trend of shooting a relatively much higher proportion of shots inside than outside compared to old teams. When the time is factored in, these teams don’t show the same change in behavior of settling for more outside shots down the stretch. Although not necessarily solely indicative, these behaviors do make sense for young teams, which have players who are more athletic and energetic, therefore more capable of driving the lane in the late stretches of games, while older teams may be more tired and fatigued, forcing them into longer shots because of an inability to beat opposition of the dribble as effectively. 

To gather a better idea of tendencies in the league, we can examine shot tendencies for every team in the league. This graphic gleans lots of useful information. Perusing the information displayed, you can rather easily make assessments of team success and coaching philosophies. For example, the Brooklyn Nets seem to take a lot of inside shots and a large proportion of them. They also do not seem to make up for this by hitting a large number of other shots successfully. Sure enough, looking up the team record for the Nets shows that they were one of the worst teams in the league that year. Contrarily, Cleveland seems to take a large number of three pointers, and hit them at a high rate. Cleveland was indeed a successful team this season. However, to more easily see differences, it might help to stack the charts and standardize the bars.

This graphic doesn’t show shot misses and makes, so it is less of a tool for team performance and more of an indicator for coaching philosophy. One of the things that pops out right away is the extremely large blue bar for a team. It is much longer than other teams, and likewise their two successive mid-range bars are miniscule. Although this might not mean much to a casual viewer, basketball fans could probably guess that this team sounds like the Houston Rockets. Sure enough, this is the case. The coaching philosophy for the Rockets is well-known for completely disregarding the mid-range game and emphasizing there “three and D” philosophy. This is reflected in their shot tendencies, as the team takes by far the larges number of threes in the NBA. 

A mosaic plot can be a useful tool see relationships among multivariate categorical data. To see if shot tendencies correlate with team success, we can divide on playoff status. As we discussed in the rest section, we didn’t seem to find visible differences in shot tendencies for days rest. However, when we divide based on whether a team was successful or not (playoff status), we do see a slight trend. The playoff caliber teams take a higher rate of more point-efficient shots. That is to say, they seem to take less mid range shots, and replace the production with more three point shots and inside shots. This is interesting, but not surprising as it confirms some of our observations based on the team data. Using a mosaic plot also gleans some interesting information about days rest. Although this was not as clearly visible on the bar graphs, we see that there are slight variations in shot tendencies depending on the number of days rest. Teams seem to take more inside shots when they have had more rest. This again corroborates some earlier insights: it is possible that on short rest, teams are more fatigued and do not have as much energy to drive to the paint and take inside shots throughout the course of the game. As a result, teams exhibit a tendency to settle for longer range shots on short rest.